[00:00:8] [[Instruments playing in the background]]
Ted Levin: Ok, were gonna start. Hello everyone, welcome to this session. This is a, officially, a discussion session, rather than purely a music session. The topic of this session is war, exile, separation and musical resilience, so music's in there.
Ted Levin: But it's about the role of music as a source of strength, of spiritual strength, of inner strength, for people who are going through really terrible situations, of exile, of having to leave their own lands and countries, resettlement, separation from families, in some cases, and how music has helped them to revitalize themselves in new conditions.
Ted Levin: And so, we will play some music, you'll hear some music. And I think we're gonna have some improvised Japanese Afghan fusion music, yes? We're gonna try. We're gonna try.
Ted Levin: My name is Ted Levin, and I'm the presenter for this session. Let me introduce the participants. On my left, George Abe. [[applause]] Next to George is Humayun Sahi. [[applause]] And next to Humayun is Salar Nade. [[applause]]
Ted Levin: Humayun and Salar are ethnically Afghan, their ancestry is Afghanistan, but they live in California where in the sounds of California stage. So everyone here, except me, I live in Vermont, but the others all are from California. George was born in California, but in fact, he's the only one of the 3 that was actually born in California.
Ted Levin: Humayun was born in Afghanistan, in Kabul, yes? In Kabul you were born. And Salar was born in Germany. His family had already left Afghanistan by the time he was born. But when I say that George was born in California, he was born in a very specific place and circumstance in California that makes him relatively unique. George, tell us about where you were born.
George Abe: And that's where I was born. During World War II, my mother moved from San Pedro to Los--to the camp.
George Abe: My father was in Los Angeles when he was relocated. They married in camp and I was born in camp.
George Abe: 5000, 6000 kids were born in those camps. Love goes on, you know? [[laughter]]
Ted Levin: So George, for people who don't know, could you just say what was the purpose of these camps.
George Abe: Ostensibly, our protection. One of the reasons was, Japanese were gonna be hung, burned out, that was one of the reasons.
George Abe: And actually, too, the whole west coast was filled with anti-orientalism.
George Abe: The first newspapers, I mean you know the Grange, The daughters of the American Revolution,
George Abe: they were really anti-immigrant, anti-immigrant, which is really scary, the whole thing going on in the day,
George Abe: so yeah so that was the atmosphere and Japanese were uh, hardly, I mean, that story is, you know, national security, again. They--they--Japanese were living as fishermen, in the port cities of San Pedro and up along Monterey and the --
George Abe: the Western Defense Command said, Hey, they're a threat!
George Abe: You know, they're going to join hands with the Japanese Army when the Japanese army lands!
George Abe: Never happened, and there was never any sabotage.
George Abe: It's one of those lie kind of things that, there was never any evidence of sabotage but 'it was going to happen', you know? As a reason for Japanese being put in camps, yes.
Ted Levin: So, everyone in the Manzanar camp was Japanese?
George Abe: Japanese American citizens and aliens, yes.
Ted Levin: So, so they were Japanese Americans who had become American citizens?
George Abe: born here.
Ted Levin: Born here nonetheless, in the camps?
George Abe: Yeah. Yeah! So there was ah, I mean we got reparations, it was a big battle but, uh, yeah, we did get some reparations.
George Abe: Uh Ah, and it was a long battle but, uh we fought for that, and uh it was it was wrong. It was wrong. Constitutionally wrong. For, to put American citizens into camps yeah.
Ted Levin: Lets talk about music. How did you come to be a musician, and what inspired you?
George Abe: Uh, my father played an instrument called a biwa, a kinda...
Ted Levin: A biwa?
George Abe: Yeah, a lute-like instrument actually it's related to, uh, sitars yeah and it's called a pipa in China
George Abe: Uh, and when it got to Japan it became a biwa.
George Abe: My mother was uh a poet, uh she wrote in tanka, or Japanese poetry.
George Abe: And I grew up in that milieu of uh artists and poets and musicians.
George Abe: And so I was inspired to play, uh I studied clarinet and saxophone in grammar school and high school.
George Abe: And uh about the time I went to college, I--I started really getting into bamboo.
George Abe: Bamboo is just really important to Asian culture.
George Abe: And, this is--for example this is a flute that I've made uh from California bamboo.
George Abe: Grown in my friend's backyard.
George Abe: Yeah, uh and like me, it's different from Japanese bamboo.
George Abe: Japanese bamboo is hard and grows slow and--
Ted Levin: So that's a shakuhachi, yes?
George Abe: Yes this is a bamboo flute that was used by Buddhist priests as a form of meditation.
Ted Levin: I--I have a friend who plays shakuhachi, and he has a little-- a little kind of um, y'know shtick that he does at concerts.
Ted Levin: He'll say "I'll give 50 dollars to anyone from the audience who can come up and make a sound on this instrument."
Ted Levin: And to this day, he's never lost 50 dollars. It's very very hard to play this instrument, [laughter] even to make a sound on it.
Ted Levin: George, show us what the shakuhachi sounds like.
George Abe: Sure.
[[Flute music]]
[[applause]]
Speaker 1: Don't stop!
[[laughter]]
Speaker 1: So, you told me your teacher was also in Manzanar.
Speaker 2: Yeah. My father and my teacher they were both in the mounted police. Really, more like Keystone Cops.
[[laughter]]
Speaker 2: Mounted police in Manzanar. And my teacher Baigo Lakita taught in Los Angeles before the war, 1940s, before 1930s, back in 20s or 30s--he taught--he taught in camp too.
Speaker 2: Some people took a shakuhachi to camp. I have some music that was handwritten, copied from a teacher's--'cause they didn't have a copy machines there, right?
Speaker 2: So handwritten Japanese music copied from the teacher's material
Speaker 1: Yeah. So this is a really interesting topic, you know, you're living in a camp really, under very debased conditions, and yet there's this urge to play music.
Speaker 1: Why--where does that come from?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, for one thing, people were bored. Nothing to do, you know? I mean, you--you're not working anymore.
Speaker 2: I think some people were getting, like, 17, 18, 19 dollars a day--doctors! I mean, 19 a day--a month! To--To be a doctor, you know, you can be a teacher. But you know you're bored, you don't have things to do. So there were teachers
George Abe: Flower arrangement, tea ceremony, and musical instruments. And so, there was a revival of interest, actually, in music--you know, in Japanese music, and culture, because of the camps. And after the camps, those teachers thrived, you know?
George Abe: Because at the time that people were put into camps, for example, in central California people were really spread out.
George Abe: They didn't have much contact, maybe once a year, during festivals, but they didn't have much contact;
George Abe: but being teenagers--it was a great time for teenagers! [[laughter]] Yeah.
George Abe: They met, they fell in love, you know, there's all kinds of stories about them.
George Abe: But for adults it was terrible, you know. You lost your business, you lost your house, you lost--You saw Farewell to Manzanar, the movie. The woman trashes her beautiful dishes because she doesn't want to do the burden skate.
Theodore Levin: So, in this respect, you share something with Homayoun Sakhi who also spent a significant amount of time living in a refugee camp. In his case, in Peshawar, Pakistan, yes? Tell us, Homayoun about that. How did you end up leaving Kabul and coming to Peshawar?
Homayoun Sakhi: Ah, actually I was in Kabul in 1992 but that time was war and--and war I think music was not... You know? They don't like music and that's why [[?]] war and I said "ok I'm going to my father" and everyone and they said like "you have to move from here" and we went on to Peshawar and I was --we call camp Nasir Bagh and we went there. That's a refugee camp.
Theodore Levin: Refugee camp.
Homayoun Sakhi: Yeah.
Theodore Levin: So, you were there with your family?
Homayoun Sakhi: Oh, yeah. I was with my family.
Theodore Levin: And you had with you your rubab. You brought your rubab?
Homayoun Sakhi: (laughter) Of course. (laughter) Without my rubab...
Theodore Levin: So, did you play music in the camp?
Homayoun Sakhi: Actually... No. Well, the first time, they said like "there's no music, don't play."
Theodore Levin: Because the Mujahideen were running the camp
Homayoun Sakhi: Actually, yeah, because there was like...
Theodore Levin: And they didn't approve of that
Homayoun Sakhi: The time also, the time was not good for music. They said like... Also my father and my mother, she said like "don't play, because, you never know, like."
Homayoun Sakhi: And I was so like, "you know, without music, I can't live." [laughter]
Theodore Levin: But you ended up in teaching, yes? You started a school in the camp?
Homayoun Sakhi: Actually, yeah. After I think one year, and I was open a new school uh and for people, and they came and I was teach.
Theodore Levin: So did they also have rubabs, or you were teaching singing? What did they do, the children?
Homayoun Sakhi: Actually rubab. Yeah. Rubabs.
Theodore Levin: They also had rubabs in camp.
Homayoun Sakhi: Yeah, uh-huh.
Theodore Levin: And what do you think was the impact of this school in the camp? Did it help raise people's spirits, did it create a sense of cultural identity?
Homayoun Sakhi: Actually that - that school, that was not in - in the camp. That was... we call Tahkal, Tahkal Payan. I was there. That was not in the camp.
Theodore Levin: I see.
Homayoun Sakhi: Yeah.
Theodore Levin: And then you ended up - how many years were you living in Pakistan before you came to Fremont?
Homayoun Sakhi: Uh... I think from '92 til 2001.
Theodore Levin: Nine years.
Homayoun Sakhi: I came... Yeah, nine years.
Theodore Levin: And then you came to Fremont. And - and what happened with your music when you came to Fremont?
Homayoun Sakhi: Uh actually just I was came - I came here because there's a lot of, you know, opportunity and also a lot of Afghans and it's- I- I- I- I teach and also people like my music [[collective laughter]]
Theodore Levin: So Homayoun is being very modest but he's in fact a major star in Fremont, California where there's a very large Afghan population,
Theodore Levin: 40,000 or so uh- Afghans living in and around Fremont which is uh- near San Francisco so out of a total population of 220,000 in Fremont,
Theodore Levin: about one in five people is of Afghan heritage or origin. So there's a huge community and Homayoun it's safe to say is - is a main or one of the main musicians who is performing in weddings. Where - where do you perform in Fremont?
Homayoun Sakhi: Everywhere. [[collective laughter]] Weddings, parties, concerts.
Theodore Levin: It's like the famous story about- about um- um- who- who was it? It was um- one of the famous German conductors, he gets into a taxi and the driver says 'Where should I take you?' and he says 'It doesn't matter, they want me everywhere. [[laughter]]
Homayoun Sakhi: Exactly
Theodore Levin: Yeah so, you're playing in weddings and?
Homayoun Sakhi: Not a lot, yeah. Some weddings.
Theodore Levin: Yeah. Show us uh- show us something on the rubab. What does this instrument sound like? Play- play something for us.
Homayoun Sakhi: Okay, like- like some classic, Afghani...?
Theodore Levin: No, Afghan folk song, whatever you want.
Homayoun Sakhi: Okay [[instrument playing]] I wanna play just a little bit of some Pashto and from Jalalabad and some eh- uh- from Mazār-i-Sharīf, modern Afghanistan, some from Iraq, some from Kabul. I was- first I'm playing the Pashto [[instrument playing]]
[[instruments playing]]
[[applause]]
Homayoun Sakhi: Thank you and now I'm going to play uh- a bit, uh, from Mazār-i-Sharīf
Theodore Levin: So this is uh- from the north of Afghanistan
Homayoun Sakhi: North Afghanistan.
Theodore Levin: Mazār-i-Sharīf
Homayoun Sakhi: Mazār-i-Sharīf yes.
Theodore Levin: And this style is called Katakan- Katakani?
Homayoun Sakhi: Yeah [[?]] we call, yeah.
Theodore Levin: It's a - it's a folk instrumental song. If you want to dance you're welcome to dance, you'll feel the rhythm, anyone who's moved to dance, please.
[[instruments playing]]
Homayoun Sakhi: Uh actually usually people they'll- you know- in this piece- they'll clapping uh- [[collective laughter]].
[[instruments playing]] [[clapping]]
[[applause]]
Theodore Levin: Beautiful, thank you.
Homayoun Sakhi: Thank you.
Theodore Levin: Homayoun, you told me once that in those years in the camp in Peshawar uh- because you couldn't play music uh- loudly because of the Mujahideen, you practiced silently, is that right? Um just-
Speaker 1: Exactly yeah, but you practicing is- like-
Homayoun Sakhi: It's not- not giving you like that feeling you know? And I'm practicing I have to play like [[hara?]] Like with- yeah.
Theodore Levin: You know with this kind of technique, you can see how- how precisely he plays. You know, you have to do that every day you have to practice to keep- to keep that power of- of technique
Theodore Levin: so really it's incredible but during those nine years, you were able to preserve your- your technique and come out of it.
Homayoun Sakhi: Yeah, thank you [[laughter]]
Theodore Levin: Salar, you had a different kind of experience.
Salar Nader: Hello everybody, I'm Salar Nader. I'm kind of like the hybrid Afghan-American here. [[laughter]] [[Cross-talk]] Via Germany
Theodore Levin: How old were you when you came to the United States?
Speaker 1: [[Ich was ein Jahr alt]]
Salar Nader: I was a year old so I don't remember Germany but- and it was West Germany at the time.
Theodore Levin: But you- you grew up uh- starting from age seven yes? Taking tabla lessons from the great master Zakir Hussain
Salar Nader: So, kind of going backtracking to Hamburg um- my family maintained- well actually every Afghan family had either a set of tabla or a rubab or a harmonium, which is a kind of pumped organ instrument, and that's what people would sing songs to remind them of Afghanistan, the homeland, and their experiences and um memories that all they had to hang on to.
So in Germany, I was kind of like this confused baby and-- pitter-pattering on the drum, not knowing that in seven years I was going to meet my guru in Berkeley, California so um- I land in California, first day for tabla class and Ustad Zakir Hussain is teaching in a classroom about this size, has about 40 to 50 students who are ranging from the youngest student, maybe 35, up to about 80 and in comes this seven year old following his dad. My dad would carry my tablas for me
And uh- Zakir [g] kind of looked at me and said 'You can play tabla?' and I- I was so confident, I was like yeah I'm going to belt out some Afghan rhythms so I kind of like- and that's all I was playing at the time was folk Afghan rhythms that could go along with any Afghan folk songs and material um-
Theodore Levin: So in- in the-- You know, you've spent years developing your technique, practicing 6-8 hours
Salar Nader: [cross-talking] Everyday. 6-8 hours a day.
Theodore Levin: And now you're teaching, yeah?
Salar Nader: And I've been teaching.
Theodore Levin: Yeah. Tell us about how you teach, it's so interesting, you know in our era of globalization of diaspora communities-- You know, with all the war that's torn Afghanistan apart for really the last 25 years.
Salar Nader: Forty years.
Theodore Levin: Well, forty years.
Salar Nader: [cross-talking] Plus.
Theodore Levin: I was in Afghanistan in 1974.
Salar Nader: Yeah.
Theodore Levin: And that might have been the last time that it was [cross-talking] calm.
Salar Nader: [cross-talking] Right. And I just turned 35 last week, so we can add 3-4 years.
Theodore Levin: [cross-talking] So you've grown up with it. But in this era where you have Afghans living literally all over the world, how do you work with your students?
Salar Nader: So, thank you to-- Here's my endorsement deal-- Skype, uh [[laughter with the audience]] I meet students online. So I met 3 students yesterday morning from Germany, Singapore, India, Kabul. As long as you got a decent Wi-Fi connection, you can meet these students, and so I meet-- You know there's actually hundreds of them online.
Salar Nader: And also in person. But, it's great, because all these students come from different backgrounds and different styles of music, so you have some students who want to learn pure, classical, traditional, tabla solo, 'cause that's what I've been taught is, is, how to be a soloist when you learn tabla.
Salar Nader: And then you kinda have to learn the rules, uh the rules of the ring when you meet someone like Homayoun Sakhi. Okay, so this is how you accompany rubab. It all-- all of Afghanistan's provinces and regions have a musical style of its own.
Theodore Levin: So you're using social media as a--
Salar Nader: For teaching.
Theodore Levin: For teaching.
Theodore Levin: And you have students in Afghanistan itself?
Salar Nader: Oh, yeah.
Salar Nader: I teach at the Afghan-- at the [[???]] Institute for Music in Kabul, I've taught there. And, also through students who come in through from the Afghan National Institute of Music-- And then, now, you know, it's like these kids-- all they hope for is like some way, some form of enjoyment, some light in their life. So, music and arts is the one untainted, uncorrupted way of being able to, you know, express yourself and find some enjoyment in the everyday happenings in Afghanistan.
Salar Nader: So, you know, we land, and it's like, Oh, yes, the classroom's packed. You know, these kids have an outlet, finally.
Theodore Levin: That's fantastic, so here's an interesting example of a diaspora community that's really providing the musical nourishment for the source place. Yeah? Going back, [cross-talking] and providing
Salar Nader: [cross-talking] It's our duty, we have to go back. And it's just, no matter what happens there, here, we have to spread the love, and that's one thing that's just-- We-- I said this yesterday, we're trying to shine our light as bright as we can and just seeing through our instruments and bring the peace and love, which we really need at a time like this.
[audience applauds]
Theodore Levin: You spoke about learning to play tabla solo, show us a little bit of what a tabla solo sounds like.
Salar Nader: Okay.
Salar Nader: Well, tabla is an oral, language, so... [[vocalizing rhythmically]]
[[drumming, vocalizing rhythmically]]
[[applause]]
Theodore Levin: Bravo. Thank you.
Theodore Levin: George, back to you. What's the instrument in front of you?
[[unintelligible]]
[[chiming]]
Salar Nader: Wow. Beautiful. I was, I was actually gonna...
Ted Levin: So George, what is this instrument?
George Abe: Uh, It's a gong used in booth[?] symbols, kind of a signaling device to begin chanting or an incantation and it should go quiet [inaudible].
Actually, if you're up here, you can put your ear on it and it's still ringing, still ringing. [laughter]
But, um, always interesting to me, I'd always heard you were really into the Silk Road theme, but um Silk Road is basically trade as we look at it, but metallurgy, and philosophies, mathematics, all those things travelled that road. And not just the Silk Road from China through Rome or wherever, but all over the world.
Ted Levin: So Buddhism came to Japan,
George Abe: yes
Ted Levin: and, um, you're a practitioner, Yes?
George Abe: Uh, yeah, I'm a practitioner of it, a specific sect of Japanese Buddhism, it's called Dobo Shishu[?], doing that Buddhism, not Zen where you do it on your own power, but more like we believe [inaudible] compassion there [inaudible] repeating his name, not a lot of [inaudible].
Ted Levin: And, and music is a part of your practice?
George Abe: Yes it is, um, for example, I play flute in an orchestra called Kagapuz[?]. Kagapuz[?] is a form of music that goes back to Kang Dynasty, China. It no longer exists in China, but is part of the ethereal household music department in Japan.
um, we were lucky at UCLA to study under Professor Syranom Tukogi [sp?] who was of the family um, well families were given responsibility for instruments, [inaudible] and he is [inaudible] back to 700 the um and he's been teaching so he could hone our group, and the [?] orchestra is incredible, so it's a whole different feeling
Ted Levin: So these, these instruments, the Japanese instruments, obviously they're quite different from the Afghan instruments in terms of the scales, the tuning, the sensibility, but can we see what happens if we try to put them together?
[[inaudible]]
Ted Levin: Improvisation. It's the spice of life.
George Abe: Welcome to a live experiment.
[[laughter]]
[[A mix of wind, string, and percussive music plays]]
Theodore Levin: Bravo. So how did they do, do you think?
Salar Nader: I wanted to close my eyes and just meditate and listen to both of you just go for a while so... that was really a massage to my ears.
Homayoun Sakhi: We will have to record some piece
Theodore Levin: Well I think this- this offers a nice metaphor for the- for the possibilities of harmony. You know, harmony of course is at the- at the center of music, but also we understand harmony in a- in a broader sense, a social sense, a metaphorical sense, so this is maybe a good thing to try to do in life as well as in music, you know, to harmonize. Yeah.
Theodore Levin: We're- we're just about out of time... how- what two, three minutes?
Unknown: Q and A also?
Theodore Levin: Yeah we have two or three minutes. Uh, just let me, I'd like to thank the sponsors and then maybe we'll go out with some music. Uh, the sponsors of- of this Sounds of California, uh, stage and of this event include the Alliance for California Traditional Arts, Radio Bilingue, uh, The American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress, and the Aga Khan Music Initiative, which is part of the Aga Khan Development Network.
Theodore Levin: It's a large international development network that's working in Afghanistan, among other places, and supports schools, music schools in Afghanistan, where both Salar and Homayoun have been teaching to try to revitalize those traditions and pass them along. So thank you to all the sponsors.
Theodore Levin: Let me also mention that tonight at 6:30 on the Ralph Rindler stage, just here, Homayoun and Salar will be performing a full concert, an hour and a half of Afghan music, so if you'd like to hear more of this music in its more traditional form, please come out. Free concert at 6:30. Why don't we end with some sounds? Couple of minutes.
Homayoun Sakhi: You choose. [laughing]
[music]
[music stops]
Homayoun Sakhi: Seriously. [laughter]
[music resumes]
[music ends] [applause]
Theodore Levin: Thank you very much, Salar Nader, Homayoun Sakhi, George Abe.
Salar Nader: Thank you, Professor Ted Levin. It's an honor to be here with all of you. Thank you. 6:30, Rindler stage, bring your dancing shoes! And your ta- uh, sunblock.
Stay put in about 5 minutes we'll have sounds of California, Chicano, some Horocho and Japanese-American festival music fandango bon. Stay put.
Yeah. Instruments in the trailer. Jim, there's a program ninty minutes...
Um yes actually uh... inside the case I'm taking one to the hotel cause I have to, I actually have...
So this goes in your case alright.
[SILENCE]